docs: Clarify important points about parametric types (#43891)
JuliaLang/julia: doc/src/manual/types.md

while treating any data of unknown or invalid type as an error.
In these languages, the programmer is responsible for ensuring the validity of all types of data that the program may encounter.
Dynamically typed languages, on the other hand, do not explicitly check types,
and types of data only become invalid when they fail to support run-time operations.

Julia's type system is dynamic, but gains some of the advantages of static type systems
by allowing optional type annotations. Type annotations are important for defining efficient new data structures,
can help enforce correctness and clarity, and can sometimes improve efficiency
(although in many contexts the Julia compiler infers types automatically.
Type annotations also play a central role in Julia because they control method dispatch:
functions can be extended to new behaviours for different argument types.
Method dispatch is explored in detail in the [Methods](@ref) section, but is rooted in the type system presented here.

All values in a Julia program belong to exactly one concrete type.
All types belong to a single type tree, i.e. they are all at least related to the [`Any`](@ref) type.

> User-defined types are treated the same as built-in types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

either this is wrong, or it needs more explanation about what "the same" means here. because there are certainly built-in types which get very special treatment

For additional flexibility, types can be defined as concrete, abstract or parametric.
Their relation to other types must be explicitly declared.

> One particularly distinctive feature of Julia's type system is that only abstract types can be used as supertypes for a family of related types.

Reviewer: ```
julia> struct Foo{T} end

julia> Foo{Int} <: Foo
true

julia> isabstracttype(Foo)
false
```

Concrete types are final, and may not subtype each other.
While this might at first seem unduly restrictive, it has many beneficial consequences with surprisingly
few drawbacks. Both [abstract types](#man-abstract-types) and [parametric types](#Parametric-Types)
can be used to create flexible interfaces while leveraging method dispatch and mitigating type errors.

The methods [`isabstracttype`](@ref) and [`isconcretetype`](@ref) can be used
to check if a type is abstract or concrete.
They may both return `false` if the type is parametrized but not abstract.
The [`subtypes`](@ref) and [`supertypes`](@ref) methods
are also provided for dynamic inspection of the type tree.
The [`typeof`](@ref) and [`isa`](@ref) methods facilitate checking the type of a value.

Julia's type system is designed to be powerful and expressive, yet clear, intuitive and unobtrusive.
Many Julia programmers may never feel the need to write code that explicitly uses types. Some

> kinds of programming, however, become clearer, simpler, faster and more robust with declared types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
kinds of programming, however, become clearer, simpler, faster and more robust with annotated types.
```

# [Types](@id man-types)

Types in Julia establish distinctions between different kinds of data,
and are used by the compiler to infer the intended use of those data.
Programming languages have traditionally employed one of two quite different type systems:
static type systems, where expressions must have a computable type before the execution of the program,
and dynamic type systems, where types are only computed at run time,
when the actual values manipulated by the program are available.
Statically typed languages typically offer faster execution,

> at the cost of type annotations which must be explicitly added by the programmer.

Reviewer 2: Explicit annotations are not required in many statically typed languages, e.g. with [Hindley–Milner type systems](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hindley%E2%80%93Milner_type_system), which (like Julia) use type inference.

The difference, as @StefanKarpinski has often put it, is that in a static language it is an error if type inference fails, whereas in a dynamic language like Julia the inference is just an optimization.

Author: Good points, thanks. How about this for the first paragraph:

> Types in Julia establish distinctions between different kinds of data, and are used by the compiler to infer the intended use of those data. Programming languages have traditionally employed one of two quite different type systems: static type systems, where expressions must have a computable type before the execution of the program, and dynamic type systems, where types are only computed at run time, when the actual values manipulated by the program are available. Statically typed languages typically offer faster execution of programs, while treating any data of unknown or invalid type as an error. In these languages, the programmer is responsible for ensuring the validity of all types of data that the program may encounter. Dynamically typed languages, on the other hand, do not explicitly check types, and types of data only become invalid when they fail to support run-time operations.

Reviewer 2: > Statically typed languages typically offer faster execution of programs

They are not any faster than type-stable code in Julia.   The main argument for static typing, IMO, is safety — by being stricter about types, the compiler can catch more bugs.

But the pros and cons of static vs. dynamic languages is a longstanding debate and a bit of a can of worms here.

Author: I guess by "typically" I probably meant "usually", but I can understand if this unintentionally suggests that Julia is not performant. I'll think about a better wording here.

Reviewer 3: I don't think "usually" is any better

Author: > Statically typed languages offer stricter guidance for avoiding unsafe code, such as treating any data of unknown or invalid type as an error. In these languages, the programmer is responsible for ensuring the validity of all types of data that the program may encounter. Writing programs in statically typed languages is, therefore, more laborious, and interactive exploration of data at run-time becomes more difficult. Dynamically typed languages, on the other hand, do not explicitly check types, and types of data only become invalid when they fail to support run-time operations. This provides a more flexible and productive programming experience, at the cost of a greater potential for programmer errors to cause bugs during execution.

?

Dynamic typing, on the other hand, allows for polymorphism,

> which is the ability to write code that can operate on different types.

Reviewer 2: Statically typed languages also have polymorphism.

Author: See above suggestion, wherein I removed the misleading reference to polymorphism.

# [Types](@id man-types)

Types in Julia establish distinctions between different kinds of data,
and are used by the compiler to infer the intended use of those data.
Programming languages have traditionally employed one of two quite different type systems:
static type systems, where expressions must have a computable type before the execution of the program,
and dynamic type systems, where types are only computed at run time,
when the actual values manipulated by the program are available.
Statically typed languages typically offer faster execution,
at the cost of type annotations which must be explicitly added by the programmer.
Dynamic typing, on the other hand, allows for polymorphism,
which is the ability to write code that can operate on different types.
Only by explicitly checking types, or when objects fail to support operations at run time,
are the types of any values ever restricted.

Julia's type system is dynamic, but gains some of the advantages of static type systems

> by allowing optional type annotations. This can be of great assistance

Reviewer 2: Maybe:

> Type annotations are important for defining efficient new data structures, can help enforce correctness and clarity, and can sometimes improve efficiency (although in many contexts the Julia compiler infers types automatically). However, type annotations also play a central role in Julia because they control method dispatch: functions can be extended to new behaviors for different argument types.

few drawbacks. Both [abstract types](#man-abstract-types) and [parametric types](#Parametric-Types)
can be used to create flexible interfaces while leveraging method dispatch and mitigating type errors.

The methods [`isabstracttype`](@ref) and [`isconcretetype`](@ref) can be used
to check if a type is abstract or concrete.
They may both return `false` if the type is parametrized but not abstract.
The [`subtypes`](@ref) and [`supertypes`](@ref) methods
are also provided for dynamic inspection of the type tree.
The [`typeof`](@ref) and [`isa`](@ref) methods facilitate checking the type of a value.

Julia's type system is designed to be powerful and expressive, yet clear, intuitive and unobtrusive.
Many Julia programmers may never feel the need to write code that explicitly uses types. Some
kinds of programming, however, become clearer, simpler, faster and more robust with declared types.

## Type Annotations

The default behavior in Julia when type annotations are omitted is to allow values to be of any type.
When additional expressiveness is needed, however,
it is easy to gradually introduce explicit annotations into previously "untyped" code.

> Adding annotations serves three primary purposes: to take advantage
> of Julia's powerful multiple-dispatch mechanism, to improve human readability,
> and to catch programmer errors.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Adding annotations serves four primary purpose: to take advantage
of Julia's powerful multiple-dispatch mechanism, to improve human readability,
to catch programmer errors, and to assist the compiler (especially when defining new types).
```
[Nobody expects the Spanish Inquisition!](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Cj8n4MfhjUc)

```

This allows a type assertion to be attached to any expression in-place.
When the type on the right is concrete,
the value on the left must have that type as its implementation.
When the type is abstract,

> it suffices for the value to be implemented by a concrete type that is a subtype of the abstract type.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
it suffices for the value to have a concrete type that is a subtype of the abstract type.
```

```

This allows a type assertion to be attached to any expression in-place.
When the type on the right is concrete,

> the value on the left must have that type as its implementation.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```

this is true for dispatch purposes, but not true in general in cases like `x::Int = 'a'`

> the value on the left must have that type as its implementation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

this is true for dispatch purposes, but not true in general in cases like `x::Int = 'a'`

Author: ```
When the type on the right is concrete,
it must be [`convert`](@ref)able to the type implemented by the value on the left.
```
?

Author: This is covered by the rest of the paragraph:

> When appended to a variable on the left-hand side of an assignment, or as part of a `local` declaration, the `::` operator means something a bit different: it declares the variable to always have the specified type, like a type declaration in a statically-typed language such as C. Every value assigned to the variable will be converted to the declared type using [`convert`](@ref):

Reviewer: woops, yes

When the type is abstract,
it suffices for the value to have a concrete type that is a subtype of the abstract type.
When appended to a variable on the left-hand side of an assignment, or as part of a `local` declaration,

> the `::` operator means something a bit different: it declares the variable to always have the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the `::` operator means something a bit different: it annotates the variable to always have the
```

An important and powerful feature of Julia's type system is that it is parametric: types can take
parameters, so that type declarations actually introduce a whole family of new types -- one for
each possible combination of parameter values. This is often referred to as "generic programming".
There are two kinds of explicitly declared parametric types.
[Parametric composite types](#man-parametric-composite-types)
declare a family of concrete, [composite types](#Composite-Types),
whereas [parametric abstract types](#Parametric-Abstract-Types)
declare a family of [abstract types](#man-abstract-types).
Other kinds of built-in parametric types such as tuple types are discussed in this section as well.

> Parametric types can also be used in [type annotations](#Type-Annotations).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Parametric types can also be used in [type annotations](#Type-Annotations) when the parameters are specified.
```
`x::Foo{T} = 1` is not possible.

!!! note
    Parametric types do not represent a single node in the type graph.
    Therefore, [`typeof`](@ref) can never return a parametric type name.
    To dynamically verify a (parametric) subtype relation, use [`isa`](@ref) instead.

!!! warning
    Type parameters are invariant: even though `Float64 <: Real`,

>     the relation `Foo{Float64} <: Foo{Real}` does NOT hold for any parametric type `Foo`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    the relation `Foo{Float64} <: Foo{Real}` does NOT hold for any parametric type `Foo`.
```

of course except for `Tuple`

Author: I didn't know about that, thanks. Is there a reason why that is the case that we can/should highlight here?

Reviewer: I'm not familiar with all the details but my understanding is that the reason for covariance is largely vestigial; it made dispatch easier in the early days of Julia or something

Tuple type covariance is described here in the docs https://docs.julialang.org/en/v1/manual/types/#Tuple-Types-1

and there is an open issue discussing the potential to switch to invariance in a hypothetical breaking release of Julia (although as a gambling man, I wouldn't put my money on that change ever happening) https://github.com/JuliaLang/julia/issues/24614

I would think a quick link to the docs is probably sufficient

There are two kinds of explicitly declared parametric types.
[Parametric composite types](#man-parametric-composite-types)
declare a family of concrete, [composite types](#Composite-Types),
whereas [parametric abstract types](#Parametric-Abstract-Types)
declare a family of [abstract types](#man-abstract-types).
Other kinds of built-in parametric types such as tuple types are discussed in this section as well.
Parametric types can also be used in [type annotations](#Type-Annotations).

!!! note
    Parametric types do not represent a single node in the type graph.
    Therefore, [`typeof`](@ref) can never return a parametric type name.
    To dynamically verify a (parametric) subtype relation, use [`isa`](@ref) instead.

!!! warning
    Type parameters are invariant: even though `Float64 <: Real`,
    the relation `Foo{Float64} <: Foo{Real}` does NOT hold for any parametric type `Foo`.
    However, `Foo{Float64} <: Foo{<:Real}` is `true`.
    This subtle but important point is the reason for the common use of
    `Container{<:Element}` syntax in type annotations.

### [Parametric Composite Types](@id man-parametric-composite-types)

!!! note
    For any parametric composite type,

>     both [`isabstracttype`](@ref) and [`isconcretetype`](@ref) will return false.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    both [`isabstracttype`](@ref) and [`isconcretetype`](@ref) will return `false`.
```

       end
```

This declaration defines a new parametric type, `Point{T}`,
holding two "coordinates" of the same type `T`.

> The parameter `T` is a placeholder, which will be replaced by a particular concrete type

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The parameter `T` is a placeholder, which will be replaced by a particular type
```
It doesn't have to be concrete, e.g. you can have `Point{Real}`.

       end
```

This declaration defines a new parametric type, `Point{T}`,
holding two "coordinates" of the same type `T`.
The parameter `T` is a placeholder, which will be replaced by a particular type
when an instance of this type is created.

> Thus, this single declaration actually declares an unlimited number of types:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thus, this single annotation actually declares an unlimited number of types:
```
